admindbdetails.html      2.1    started
admindbpreamble.html     2.3    started
adminsubscribeack.txt    2.0    done
adminunsubscribeack.txt  2.0    done
admlogin.html            2.0    started
approve.txt              2.0    done
article.html             2.1    done
bounce.txt               2.1    done
checkdbs.txt             2.0    done
convert.txt              2.0    done
cronpass.txt             2.0    done
headfoot.html            2.1    started
help.txt                 2.2    done
invite.txt               2.0    done
listinfo.html            2.3    started
masthead.txt             2.0    done
newlist.txt              2.1    done
nomoretoday.txt          2.0    done
options.html             2.10   started
postack.txt              2.1    done
postauth.txt             2.0    done
postheld.txt             2.1    done
private.html             2.1
refuse.txt               2.0    done
roster.html              2.0    done
subauth.txt              2.1    done
subscribeack.txt         2.1    done
subscribe.html           2.1    done
unsub.txt                2.1    done
unsubauth.txt            2.0    done
userpass.txt             2.1    done
verify.txt               2.1    done
emptyarchive.html        2.0
admindbsummary.html      2.0
disabled.txt             2.1    done
